all right welcome to
uh part four of this video series for
chapter five diffusion and solids
so so far we have talked about the
mechanism of diffusion
this is vacancy or interstitial we've
talked about why it's important
an example of case hardening we talked
about
how to predict the rate of diffusion for
steady state using fixed first law
now we'd like to talk about where the
temperature dependence
comes in
all right so temperature dependence is
in that diffusivity or diffusion
coefficient
in fixed first law okay and so this
diffusion coefficient
is like a rate constant for the
diffusion process
and it has an arrhenius behavior exactly
like the equation we had
for the number of vacancies and like you
have seen before for chemical
kinetics so now my activation energy my
barrier
is that for diffusion okay
again we would end up with a kt or in
this case an
rt r the gas constant on the bottom
rt is usually better here because q is
usually given
perhaps in joules per mole and so the
gas constant
being in joules mole kelvin cancels our
units
so whether you use k or r here just
depends on the units that's given for
your
activation energy okay so this term
inside the exponential
has to be dimensionless all right and
then we have a constant out front of the
exponential so it's called the
pre-exponential
and this d0 and this activation
activation energy q
are both independent of temperature
so this is how we can then calculate the
diffusion coefficient
at a given temperature and
important thing to notice is that it's
exponential
and this is particularly important if
you think about this
and you if you go ahead and put in some
numbers here
you'll find that room temperature d is
very small
so materials are stable they're not
moving around
at least not in our time frame and then
as we go to higher temperatures
this diffusion rate goes up
exponentially which allows us to now
move stuff
around move solid mass around
compositions around
in the solid state and so it allows for
a lot of processing methods
and so that's pretty neat if you think
about that ability
over a fairly small temperature window
of room temperature up to maybe a
thousand degrees c
and we go from stable materials to
materials where we can
move mass around and process them
all right so in this particular plot
this is actually a good plot and then
let me just bring up a good point when
you're doing your reading
whenever you see a plot in the text and
you may want to look at what they're
trying to show you
in the plot ask yourself why why are
they bothering to show you this
particular plot
it's rare in most of the cases that
they're just trying to show you a value
it's always because they're trying to
show you some kind of a concept
or some kind of a trend and so in this
particular case the thing
to kind of ask or notice is that it
looks like
carbon in iron
are fairly high in rate
over this temperature range and then
we've got sort of
iron and iron iron and alpha iron
aluminum and aluminum so these are
self-diffusion cases
and they seem to be fairly low at least
in comparison to these
so you so if you notice this you might
ask why
well this is showing you the difference
between interstitial diffusion
which is the carbon case up here and
since these are self-diffusion then
these have to be by a vacancy mechanism
so we have vacancy here an interstitial
up here
so you can see the interstitial
mechanism being faster
like we said earlier now you can see it
in values
this alpha iron versus gamma iron is
something that we'll get into a lot more
later but the alpha iron is your room
temperature iron this is body centered
cubic
and gamma iron is a higher temperature
iron
where you do most of your steel
processing and this is actually a face
centered cubic
material okay so you don't have to
memorize these for this chapter
like i said we'll work with these a lot
more as we get into chapter 9.
all right so interstitial greater than
substitutional
substitutional meaning vacancy
all right so let's look at a quick
example
we have the activation energy
given for diffusion case
we've also been given not the
pre-exponential
but the diffusion coefficient that's
this one
at a particular temperature
and we like to know what the diffusion
coefficient is
at a different temperature 350 degrees c
all right so we could just go ahead and
plug in
our value here for d plug in for q
and then solve for d zero once we get
that we can then use the q
given the d zero we just found that the
new temperature
set of 350 calculate d
okay another way to do it
is to go ahead and do all the equation
manipulation first
see what we get and put in the numbers
at the end
so everything we're going to do here is
we're going to transform our
original equation by taking the natural
log of both sides
then we're going to subtract the two
equations from each other
and now we've got one equation that
will give us the diffusivity at some
temperature
if we know the diffusivity at a
different temperature
so i can just plug straight into this
equation
make sure you're in kelvin we plug away
and we get our new diffusivity so we
change only from 300 to 350 that's a
pretty minor change but you can see we
about doubled
the diffusivity value